So now that we've talked about
the pros and cons of synchrony,
let's turn the tables
and talk about the pros
and cons of asynchrony.
And we're going to use
this to help motivate
the need for concepts
like Java Futures and Java
CompletableFutures by
explaining what asynchrony is
and how it can be used
for benefiting programs.
So asynchrony is a means
of concurrent programming
where the caller doesn't block
waiting for the called code
to complete.
So it's kind of like
mailing a letter.
If you go mail a letter to a
friend, or to your credit card
company or whomever,
chances are you
don't drop the
letter in the mailbox
and then sit there waiting
for the response to come back.
You go off and live your
life and do other things
while you're waiting
for a response,
if you even need a response.
Instead, the way
that asynchronous
calls work is that they
immediately return something
called a Future, and
then they continue
running the computation
in the background.
So you can see here, when
we invoke these operations,
like if you had an
asynchronous model
you'd say search for
word, and it would
return a Future right away.
And then we'd go ahead
and search for the word.
And then you could immediately
call another invocation
of search for word,
get back a Future,
and then keep running
in the background.
And at some point,
of course, you'll
have to get the results back.
But that's for a
later discussion.
A Future is considered
to be triggered
when the asynchronous call
it's associated with completes.
So if you look at
this particular model
here, which we'll talk about in
a lot more detail very shortly,
we first invoke an
asynchronous call.
And it runs in some kind of
background service thread.
We get back a
Future of some sort.
And then the client
can obtain the result
after the asynchronous
computation completes.
So when the asynchronous
call finishes,
then the Future
becomes triggered.
And we can get the result back.
And we'll see there's
lots of different ways
to do this with the various
Java asynchronous approaches.
One example of an
asynchronous model
is something provided by Android
with its Asynchronous Task
framework.
And again, if you go
back and watch the videos
for my concurrent
object-oriented programming
course, you'll see I
have a whole lesson where
we talk about the
Asynchronous Task framework.
I think it's actually
sort of a whole week
where we talk about
Asynchronous Task.
And Asynchronous
Task framework can
be used to perform background
operations asynchronously
in a pool of threads.
And it then can
publish the results
of those asynchronous
computations back to the user
interface thread
without requiring
application developers to
have to manipulate threads
or handlers or runnables, or
other kinds of low-level things
that are otherwise needed to
program concurrency on Android.
The Asynchronous Task,
when you execute it,
it runs long-duration
operations.
Because that's typically
what you use it for.
Those are run asynchronously in
one or more background threads.
The threads in the
background can block,
but they don't block the calling
thread, which is typically
the user interface thread.
So the calling thread could
run and do other things
while the background threads
are doing their processing
asynchronously, hence
the term AsyncTask.
And when the background thread
either completes the operation
or it fails, or it wants to
report its progress, the client
thread, the user
interface thread,
the calling thread can be
automatically notified.
And one of the cool
things about this model
is it shields the client code
from the details of programming
Futures.
Under the hood,
there's some Futures
going on in the asynchronous
task implementation.
In particular, there's
something called
FutureTask, which is a Future.
But the programming
abstraction shields you
from the knowledge of
what's actually happening.
So that's pretty cool.
So let's talk about
the pros of asynchrony.
One of the pros,
which goes right back
to our discussion of reactive
programming principles,
is responsiveness.
A calling thread
needn't block waiting
for the asynchronous operation
it's requested to complete.
So as a result,
the calling thread
can go off and do other things,
like be responsive to users.
And what this often
means is we're
better able to leverage
the parallelism that's
available in multi-core systems.
Because we can have all
these threads running
in the background, doing
their thing, using cores,
and yet we can still be
responsive and reactive
to our users, who don't
want to sit there and look
at an hourglass saying, oh,
the user interface is frozen.
I can't get a result. I can't
interact with the system.
Another benefit of
elasticity, which also,
of course, is one of the
four key reactive programming
principles, is elasticity.
You can take those
requests that you provide
and then run them scalably and
concurrently on multiple cores.
So you don't have to, basically,
only run on a handful of cores.
You can have a pool of cores.
And then, as the
workload increases,
you can use more
cores, and hopefully
be able to get more work
done per unit time, which is
basically a throughput measure.
You may also be able to get
results back faster, which
is a latency measure.
So elasticity is
basically the way
to improve system performance.
Elasticity is
particularly useful
to auto-scale computations in
cloud computing environments.
Now, as I've said
before, the mechanisms
available in the
CompletableFutures framework
are not going to take
advantage of cloud-
and cluster-style programming.
But you can still
auto-scale on the cores
that are available to you on
your single-processor platform.
And of course, you could
also use CompletableFutures
in a cloud or cluster
programming framework
in order to take
better advantage
of the multi-core processing
on a given node in the cluster.
Of course, it's not all
unicorns and rainbows.
So there are some
downsides to asynchrony.
One of the tricky parts is
you end up with a system
that's often more unpredictable.
And even though things
may be responsive,
the response times may be
somewhat unpredictable due
to the inherent non-determinism
of asynchronous operations.
The whole point of
asynchrony is to run things
in the background, and we're not
trying to do them in lock-step,
in a fully synchronous way.
So you may end up
getting results
that occur at different times.
Now, this isn't really just
a problem with asynchrony.
It's really a problem
with concurrency.
It's a problem with parallelism.
But it's something that may
become more obvious if you
start running things
asynchronously,
because they don't
occur, and they
don't show up, in
exactly the same order
that you may have expected.
In particular, the results
may occur in a different order
than the original
calls were made.
And if you need to
rearrange the order somehow,
to put them back in,
say, the encounter order,
as we talked about
with parallel streams,
then additional time and
effort may be required.
And if you think back
to our discussions
about parallel streams,
we talked about ordering.
We talked about some operations,
some terminal operations,
some intermediate operations
enforcing ordering,
some intermediate operations,
some terminal operations
not enforcing ordering.
And as a general rule, if
you don't enforce ordering,
you'll get things done faster.
If you do enforce ordering, you
can still run them in parallel,
but it'll take a longer
time to stitch them
all back together again in
the proper encounter order.
So as a rule of thumb,
you're better off
if you can live with
out-of-order responses
in an asynchronous
world and just deal
with the unpredictability
that's implied by that.
Another property of asynchrony
that gets a little tricky
is it is often harder to
program a synchronous apps.
And it's often
harder to debug them.
One reason for this, and we'll
see this over and over again
as we walk through
the next few weeks,
is that the patterns
and best practices
of asynchronous programming
are typically not
as well-understood as the
patterns and practices
of synchronous programming,
mostly because people
have a lot longer time
behind the wheel doing
synchronous programming, because
that's typically how we learn
to do computing from day one.
And we just don't have
as much experience
with asynchronous programming.
Moreover, a lot of the
asynchronous programming models
are very crufty and weird
and hard to work with.
So that doesn't make
anything any better.
In particular,
asynchronous programming
is very tricky without
proper abstractions.
Anybody who's tried
to program with some
of the early JavaScript
Promises and Futures mechanisms
know that you could get
into something known
as callback hell very quickly.
And you can read this
article to learn more
about what callback hell is.
I love this diagram.
It looks like this poor
guy's being crushed
by a wave of callback hell.
And the good news is that the
way that CompletableFutures
work eliminate the
need for callback hell,
and in fact, in many
cases, can actually
make asynchronous
programming appear very much
like synchronous programming
while still leveraging
all the benefits of asynchrony.
Another tricky part about
asynchronous programming
is it can be hard to
track down errors,
because things are occurring
at different pieces of time.
And so unpredictability
and nondeterminism
means you may get
different results when
you run your code in
the debugger versus when
you run the code live.
And that will tend to
throw you for a loop
if you're not careful.
Again, this is not really a
problem with just asynchrony.
It's just a general problem
with concurrent processing.
If things run in parallel,
if things run concurrently,
they'll be nondeterministic.
And as a consequence,
they're harder to debug.
So now that we've
talked about asynchrony
and looked at the
pros and cons, let's
kind of weigh them and
see what we come out with.
So two things are necessary
for the pros of asynchrony
to outweigh the
cons of asynchrony.
Number one, if you're going
to go to all this trouble,
you really want to see a
speed-up in performance.
There's no point in
standing on your head
and learning patterns
and best practices
and programming APIs for
asynchronous programming
if you end up with slower code
than if you did something else,
like use parallel streams.
And if you take a look,
especially at some
of the examples
we'll cover later,
like our CompletableFutures
version of the image stream
Gang case study, which
we covered earlier
for parallel streams, you'll see
that, in fact, it is worth it.
You do get a faster
performance boost
by taking the time to
master the complexity
of asynchronous programming
with CompletableFutures.
So that's one thing.
You've got to get a
win for all this pain.
gain for the pain.
And of course, another
thing that is necessary
is that the asynchronous
programming model
should reflect
the key principles
of the reactive
programming paradigm.
So it should be responsive,
resilient, elastic,
message-driven, and so on.
And once again, we're
very fortunate that that's
precisely what the
CompletableFutures
framework does.
So the competing
futures framework
provides a very
nice asynchronous,
concurrent, and
parallel programming
model that performs
very well and supports
the reactive paradigm.
And that's good
news, because that
means that all the
discussion we're
about to go through
over the next few weeks
will not waste your time.
But by the time you
master this paradigm,
and you'll get a
chance to master it
through several means,
you'll be way ahead
of the game in
terms of knowing how
to make very effective, very
productive, and very efficient
solutions using the
CompletableFutures framework.